# Unit 4: Good Programming Practices

# Lecture 7: Testing And Debugging

## 4.1 Programming Challenges

How do I test my code?  
When it doesn't work the way I intended it, how do I go about **debugging** it?  

Ideally, you want to write code that's going to do exactly what you want to do the first time.  That doesn't tend to happen often in computer science.  

---
### We Aim For High Quality -- An Analogy With Soup
---

You're making soup, but bugs keep falling in from the ceiling.  What do you do?  
- check the soup for bugs
    - testing
- keep lid closed
    - defensive programming
- clean kitchen
    - eliminate source of bugs, i.e. debugging
--- 
### Defensive Programming
---
- Defensive programming, at a high level, basically has three parts
    - write **specifications** for functions
        - outline what you expect to come into the function as input, and what you will deliver if I got things in the correct form
    - **modularize** programs
        - don't write giant `main` function or other; break things down into obvious pieces (which will aid in testing as you're able to isolate components to test/fix)
    - check **conditions** on inputs/outputs (assertions)
        - we'll see assertions in a moment, but for now just know that they are our means to doing this formally
- Testing/Validation
    - **compare** input/output pairs to specification
    - "it's not working!"
    - ask yourself, "how can I break my program?"
        - what are the right kinds of inputs to use to make sure I test all of the different cases that are going to be important, ensuring that my program is doing the right things?
- Debugging
    - **study events** leading up to an error
        - what was going on before this error occurred?  what were variable states?
    - "why isn't it working?"
    - ask yourself, "how can I fix my program?"

Defensive programming comes down to defining what we expect to come in, what I'll deliver, and then ensuring that I actually do that.  

Testing/validation comes down to comparing inputs and outputs.  Given a set of functions I want to test, I should write a list of example inputs, and what I expect in each case as output.  

---

## 4.2 Classes Of Tests

---
### Set Yourself Up For Easy Testing And Debugging
---

- from the start, design code to ease this part of the process
- break program into simple, self-contained **modules** that can be tested and debugged individually
- **document constraints** on modules using docstrings
    - what do you expect the input to be? the output?
- **document assumptions** you made about the code design
    - what was your thinking process when you created this code?
    - what were the assumptions that you were making that let this code be built in this particular way?
    - these questions are going to guide the creation of particular cases to make sure that your assumptions are in fact valid, or that the code is being entered in a manner that supports these assumptions

---
### When Are You Ready To Test?
---

- ensure the code **runs**
    - remove syntax errors
    - remove static semantic errors
    - Python interpreter can usually find these for you
- have a set of **expected results**
    - an input set
    - for each input, the expected output

---
### Classes Of Tests
---

- **Unit Testing**
    - validate each piece of program
    - **testing each function** separately
- **Regression Testing**
    - add test for bugs as you find them in a function
    - **catch reintroduced** errors that were previously fixed
- **Integration Testing**
    - does the **overall program** work as intended?
    - people tend to rush to do this part

This process represents a progression, but it may not be linear; you may find that you frequently revisit and redo unit and regression testing as you move towards passing a full integration test.  

---
### Testing Approaches
---

Eventually, you're going to have to have code that does what you intended.  How do you test then?  
There are a couple things we can suggest.  The first is to use your intuition about natural boundaries in the problem.  


- **intuition** about natural boundaries to a problem
    - can you come up with some natural partitions?
```python
def is_bigger(x, y):
    """
    Assumes x and y are ints

    Returns True if y is less than x, else False
    """
```
- if no natural partitions, might do **random testing**
    - probability that code is correct increases with more tests
    - better options below
- **black box testing**
    - explore paths through specification
    - i.e., don't look at the code, just asses the specifications
        - what are the test cases that would deal with all the different ways in which I might go through this specification?
        - are there natural places or natural boundaries in the inputs that I'd like to look at?
- **glass box testing**
    - explore paths through code

---
### Black Box Testing
---

```python
def sqrt(x, eps):
    """
    Assumes x, eps floats, x >= 0, eps > 0

    Returns res such that x-eps <= res*res <= x+eps
    """
```

| CASE | x | eps |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Boundary | `0` | `0.0001` |
| Perfect square | `25` | `0.0001` |
| Less than 1 | `0.05` | `0.0001` |
| Irrational sqaure root | `2` | `0.0001` |
| Extremes | `2` | `1.0/2.0**64.0` |
| Extremes | `1.0/2.0**64.0` | `1.0/2.0**64.0` |
| Extremes | `2.0**64.0` | `1.0/2.0**64.0` |
| Extremes | `1.0/2.0**64.0` | `2.00**64.0` |
| Extremes | `2.0**64.0` | `2.00**64.0` |

---
### Glass Box Testing
---

- **use code** directly to guide design of test cases
- called **path-complete** if every potential path through code is tested at least once
- what are some **drawbacks** to this type of testing?
    - can go through loops arbitrarily many times
    - missing paths
- guidelines
    - branches
        - exercise all parts of a conditional
    - for loops
        - loop not entered
        - body of loop executed exactly once
        - body of loop executed more than once
    - while loops
        - same as for loops
        - cases that catch all ways to exit loop

```python
# BUGGED CODE

def abs(x):
    """
    Assumes x is an int

    Returns x if x >= 0 and -x otherwise
    """
    if x  < -1:
        return -x
    else:
        return x
```
- in this example, a path-complete test suite could **miss a bug**
- path-complete sets suite: 2 and -2
- but `abs(-1)` incorrectly returns `-1`
- should still test boundary cases (aka edge cases)

---

## 4.3 Bugs

- once you have discovered that your code does not run properly, you want to:
    - isolate the bubg(s)
    - eradicate the bug(s)
    - retest until code runs correctly

Historical note:  
- Mark II Aiken Relay Computer at Harvard University
- Admiral Grace Murray Hopper's notes on 09/09/1947
    - technicians discovered moth in a relay tube that was causing errors in calculating arithmetic operations
    - first discovery of a "bug"

---
### Runtime Bugs
---

- **Overt** vs. **Covert**
    - **Overt** has an obvious manifestation that something is wrong in that the code crashes or runs forever
    - **Covert** has no obvious manifestation that something has gone awry in that the code returns a value, which may be incorrect (which may be difficult to determine)
- **Persistent** vs. **Intermittent**
    - **Persistent** occurs every time code is run
        - generally easier to pick out and squash
    - **Intermittent** only occurs sometimes, even if run on the same input(s)
        - these tend to depend on other factors (examples being something on the web or time-related)
        - hard to spot and get rid of

---
### Categories Of Bugs
---

- **Overt** and **persistent**
    - obvious to detect
    - good programmers use **defensive programming** to try to ensure that if an error is made, bug will fall into or be forced into this category
- **Overt** and **intermittent**
    - more frustrating, can be harder to debug, but if conditions that prompt bug can be reproduced, can be handled
- **Covert**
    - highly dangerous, as users may not realize answers are incorrect until code has been run for a some time

---

## 4.4 Debugging

- steep learning curve
- goal is to have a bug-free program
- tools
    - built-in to IDLE, Anaconda, VSCode, etc.
        - be encouraged to use these
    - Python Tutor
    - **`print`** statement debugging
        - allows you to see what you're expecting variable states, etc. to be vs. their actual values when the code runs
    - use your brain, be **systematic** in your bug hunts (use git, for example)

---
### Print Statements
---

- good way to **test a hypothesis**
- when to print:
    - enter function
    - parameters
    - function results
- use **bisection method**
    - put print halfway in code
    - decide where bug may be searched for depending on values

---
### Error Messages -- Easy
---

- trying to access beyond the limits of a list
    - `test = [1,2,3]` then `test[4]` evals to `IndexError`
- trying to convert an innapropriate type
    - `int(test)` evals to `TypeError`
- referencing a non-existent variable
    - `a` evals to `NameError`
- mixing data types without appropriate coercion
    - `'3'/4` evals to TypeError
- forgetting to close a parenthesis, quotation, etc.
    - evals to `SyntaxError`

---
### Logic Errors
---

- **think** before you write new code
- **draw** pictures, diagrams, take breaks while working through long or tough problems
- **explain** the code to yourself, a colleague, a friend, a rubber duck...

---
### Debugging Steps
---

- **study** program code
    - ask, "how did I get the unexpected result?"
    - is my problem one in a family of related problems?
- **scientific method**
    - study available data
    - form hypothesis
    - repeatable experiments
    - pick simplest input to test with

| DON'T | DO |
| --- | --- |
| write the entire program | write a function |
| test the entire program | test the function, debug the function |
| debug entire program at once | write a function |
|  | test the function, debug the function |
|  | do integration testing |
| --- | --- |
| change code | backup code |
| remember where bug was | change code |
| test code | write down potential bug(s) in comment(s) |
| forget what bug was or what change made | test code |
| panic | compare new version with old version |

---

## 4.5 Debugging Example

---
### Debugging Skills
---

- treat debugging as a search problem: look for explanations for incorrect behavior
    - study available data--both correct and incorrect cases
    - form a hypothesis consistent with the data
    - design and run a repeatable experiment, with potential to refute the hypothesis
    - keep record of experiments performed: use narrow range of hypotheses

---
### Debugging As Search
---

- want to narrow down space of possible sources of error
- design experiments that expose intermediate stages of computation (use `print` statements), and use results to further narrow search
- binary search can be a powerful tool for this

---
### Some Pragmatic Hints
---

- look for the usual suspects
- ask why the code is doing what it is, not why it's wrong
- the bug may not be where you think it is -- systematically eliminate search locations
- explain the problem to someone else or your rubber duck
- documentation may or may not be helpful depeneding on your bug
- when stuck, take a break and come back later

---